# Research-Paper

## Background
I'm transitioning from a career in neuroscience to becoming a data analyst. As many of the skills I've developed as a scientist are transferable to data analysis I'd like to showcase relevant skills as part of my portfolio:
[This scientific research paper](JOE220204.pdf) has been authored by me and written in collaboration with colleagues from the [Institute of Neuroanatomy](https://www.uke.de/english/departments-institutes/institutes/neuroanatomy/index.html) and the [Research Group Behavioral Biology](https://www.uke.de/english/departments-institutes/institutes/research-group-behavioral-biology/index.html) of the Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases in Hamburg. It's about behavioral and molecular neurobiology.  

## Summary
The study investigated the role of a specific estrogen receptor called GPER1 in mice and found that it has different effects in males and females. In male mice lacking GPER1, anxiety was reduced, while in female mice, the fear response was increased, especially when estrogen levels were high. Both male and female mice with GPER1 deficiency had problems with spatial learning and memory. The study also found changes in brain activity and certain proteins in these mice, suggesting that GPER1 plays a complex and sex-specific role in brain function, which could be related to cognitive and mood disorders.

## Skills

1. **Analytical Skills:** Working on this scientific project required meticulous planning and careful analysis of the generated data. As I was responsible for the behavioral testing and analysis, I had to plan experiments in a way that reduce the amount of animals used while still being able to produce statistically significant results. Being limited by the amount of data I could generate and the nonlinear relationship we observed between sexes and estrogen levels I had to critically analyze complex data, identify patterns, and draw meaningful conclusions. Finding patterns and meaningful implications in big datasets is a skill that I can transfer from science to data analysis.

2. **Quantitative and Statistical Skills:** As a neuroscientist, I have experience with statistical analysis of experimental data. I have experience with a variety paramteric and non-parametric tests, like student's t-test, ANOVA, MANOVA, linear regression, chi-square test, Mann-Whitney U Test, Wilcoxon Signed-Rank Test and Kruskal-Wallis Test. A applied these tests for different scientific projects throughout my studies. For the present study we used the Kolmogorov-Smirnov Test for normal distribution and ANOVA analysis for behavioral data. To apply these tests I have used mainly SPSS, Graphpad Prism, Excel and R-Studio.

3. **Data Management:** All of the behavioral experiments I conducted were video recorded for subsequent analysis and documented on paper protocols, in my personal labbook and a shared digital labbook. This way the data is well archived and organized in a way that other scientists can pick up were I left to continue on the project. Each video file I recorded was named according to a schema that represented the most important information: animalID - Experiment Abbreviation - Timestamp. After analysis of the video files I created corresponding excel files that stored the relevant data for each experiment, this file shared the same naming convention without the animalID field. To keep track of the animal experiments, their sex, birthdate, age during the experiment and especially their cycle stage I created a common excel file for all animals. Properly named files were stored in a folder structure to represent the cohorts of animals as they were tested. Since I didn't rely on legacy code or files I was able to build a data management system I'm well used to as I use it for my personal files as well.  

4. **Programming Skills:** If you have experience with programming languages like Python or R in your research, make sure to include this in your portfolio. Provide examples of code you've written for data analysis, visualization, or modeling.

5. **Data Visualization:** The figures in the paper were created with GraphPad Prism. I'd like to showcase figure 2, as it was a difficult task to visuallize 10 consecutive datapoints for 2 sexes, 2 genotypes and 2 levels of the cycle stage into a single plot while pointing out specific datapoints. It might not be the most fancy type of plot, but it took a lot of effort to effectively portray the idea we had for the data.

6. **Domain Knowledge:** The field of research was in Behavioral and Molecular Neuro-Biology with special emphasiz on Endocrinology. It also focused on sex differences in mammals which is a research topic very relevant for the healthcare and medicine field. As male and female bodies react differently to certain drugs and treatments its important to include both sexes in basic research, unfortunately most research is being conducted in male systems, because scientists fear uncertainty of their data due to hormonal variance in female systems.

7. **Problem-Solving Skills:** Due to preliminary work in the field we had a general idea to investigate the sex differences in mice with a focus on behavioral and cognitive abilities. After the aquisition of behavioral molecular data we found sex and hormone level effects, but they were non-linear and very difficult to interpret. To come up with a conclusive story for our findings I created different visualizations of the same data which focused on specific details of the data. This way it was easier to communicate ideas and approaches to this data with colleagues and come up with the story that made it to the paper. Communicating complex relationships in a visual manner helped me solve problems in this project.

8. **Communication Skills:** The data of this research paper stems in part from my master thesis, which was a joined collaboration from my hometown university in Oldenburg, the university clinic in Hamburg and the center for neurodegenerative diseases in Hamburg. As all parties were eager to know about the progress of my thesis I had the opportunity to present my progress and the final thesis to a scientific community with a shared background in biology and medicine, but each with their own specialized expertise. After my master thesis was concluded the cooperation grew, as I moved to another lab in Magdeburg, where I got to exchange new ideas with my PhD colleagues.
